UseHealthChecks vs. MapHealthChecks /5 (#29439)
dotnet/AspNetCore.Docs: aspnetcore/host-and-deploy/health-checks.md

:::code language="csharp" source="~/host-and-deploy/health-checks/samples/7.x/HealthChecksSample/Snippets/Program.cs" id="snippet_MapHealthChecksUsingDependencyInjection":::

## UseHealthChecks vs. MapHealthChecks

> The `MapHealthChecks` method accepts arguments similar to `UseHealthChecks`. The advantage of using `MapHealthChecks` over `UseHealthChecks` is the ability to apply authorization and to have greater fine-grained control over the matching policy. The primary advantage of using `UseHealthChecks` over `MapHealthChecks` is terminating the middleware and selecting endpoints via port.

Reviewer: I think a summary of their implementation will help people understand their differences:

```suggestion
There are two ways to make health checks accessible to callers:

* <xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.Builder.HealthCheckApplicationBuilderExtensions.UseHealthChecks%2A> registers middleware for handling health checks requests in the middleware pipeline.
* <xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.Builder.HealthCheckEndpointRouteBuilderExtensions.MapHealthChecks%2A> registers a health checks endpoint. The endpoint is matched and executed along with other endpoints in the app.

The advantage of using `MapHealthChecks` over `UseHealthChecks` is the ability to use endpoint aware middleware, such as authorization, and to have greater fine-grained control over the matching policy. The primary advantage of using `UseHealthChecks` over `MapHealthChecks` is controlling exactly where health checks runs in the middleware pipeline.
```

<xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.Builder.HealthCheckApplicationBuilderExtensions.UseHealthChecks%2A>:

> * Terminates the pipeline when a request matches the health check endpoint. [Short-circuiting](xref:fundamentals/middleware/index) is often desirable because it avoids unnecessary work, such as logging and other middleware.

Reviewer 2: Is this difference actually by design? To be specific, is it by design that `MapHealthChecks` does **not** short-circuit?
Both methods register the same `HealthCheckMiddleware`. The only difference is how it is mapped. See [here](https://github.com/dotnet/aspnetcore/blob/d47e49e9c1e173ac90821f7e89cc38e710274241/src/Middleware/HealthChecks/src/Builder/HealthCheckEndpointRouteBuilderExtensions.cs#L77-L81) and [here](https://github.com/dotnet/aspnetcore/blob/d47e49e9c1e173ac90821f7e89cc38e710274241/src/Middleware/HealthChecks/src/Builder/HealthCheckApplicationBuilderExtensions.cs#L265).
Maybe related: https://github.com/aspnet/Diagnostics/pull/516

Reviewer 3: The [routing documentation](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/aspnet/core/fundamentals/routing) doesn't explain it very clearly, but the [.NET 5.0 to .NET 6.0 migration document](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/aspnet/core/migration/50-to-60-samples?view=aspnetcore-7.0#:~:text=Routes%20added%20directly%20to%20the%20WebApplication%20execute%20at%20the%20end%20of%20the%20pipeline.) says:

> Routes [i.e. `MapGet()`] added directly to the [WebApplication](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/api/microsoft.aspnetcore.builder.webapplication) execute at the _**end**_ of the pipeline.

* Is primarily used for configuring the health check middleware in the pipeline.

> * Can select any endpoint on a port with a `null` or empty `PathString`, which can be useful for the following scenarios:

Reviewer: "Endpoint" has a meaning in ASP.NET Core of a route that matches to code. I don't think it makes sense here.

Is this what you mean:
```suggestion
* Can match any path on a port with a `null` or empty `PathString`, which can be useful for the following scenarios:
```

  * Provides a default health check without specifying a path. Allows performing a health check on the root path or any request made to the specified port.
  * Selecting any endpoint on a port.

>   * Provides a catch-all health check. Handles health checks for any path.

Reviewer: These are all saying the same thing.

Author: > These are all saying the same thing.

@JamesNK  Can you make a suggestion of the lines to delete?

* [Source code](https://github.com/dotnet/aspnetcore/blob/main/src/Middleware/HealthChecks/src/Builder/HealthCheckApplicationBuilderExtensions.cs)

<xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.Builder.HealthCheckEndpointRouteBuilderExtensions.MapHealthChecks%2A>:
* Is used for mapping specific routes or endpoints for health checks.

> * Allows customization of the URL or path where the health check endpoint is accessible.  Additional options and parameters can be specified, such as customizing the HTTP status codes, response content, or applying filters to determine which health checks to execute.

Reviewer 2: All of that also seems possible with `UseHealthChecks` (via `HealthCheckOptions`).

* <xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.Builder.HealthCheckApplicationBuilderExtensions.UseHealthChecks%2A> registers middleware for handling health checks requests in the middleware pipeline.
* <xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.Builder.HealthCheckEndpointRouteBuilderExtensions.MapHealthChecks%2A> registers a health checks endpoint. The endpoint is matched and executed along with other endpoints in the app.

The advantage of using `MapHealthChecks` over `UseHealthChecks` is the ability to use endpoint aware middleware, such as authorization, and to have greater fine-grained control over the matching policy. The primary advantage of using `UseHealthChecks` over `MapHealthChecks` is controlling exactly where health checks runs in the middleware pipeline.

<xref:Microsoft.AspNetCore.Builder.HealthCheckApplicationBuilderExtensions.UseHealthChecks%2A>:
* Terminates the pipeline when a request matches the health check endpoint. [Short-circuiting](xref:fundamentals/middleware/index) is often desirable because it avoids unnecessary work, such as logging and other middleware.
* Is primarily used for configuring the health check middleware in the pipeline.

> * Can match any path on a port with a `null` or empty `PathString`, which can be useful for the following scenarios:
>   * Provides a default health check without specifying a path. Allows performing a health check on the root path or any request made to the specified port.
>   * Selecting any endpoint on a port.
>   * Provides a catch-all health check. Handles health checks for any path.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Can match any path on a port with a `null` or empty `PathString`. Allows performing a health check on any request made to the specified port.
```
